The BSD Packet Filter:
A New Architecture for User-level Packet Capture 3
Steven McCanne y and Van Jacobson y
Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory
One Cyclotron Road
Berkeley, CA 94720
mccanne@ee.lbl.gov, van@ee.lbl.gov
December 19, 1992
Abstract
Many versions of Unix provide facilities for user-level packet
capture, making possible the use of general purpose work-
stations for network monitoring. Because network monitors
run as user-level processes, packets must be copied across the
kernel/user-space protection boundary. This copying can be
minimized by deploying a kernel agent called a packet filter,
which discards unwanted packets as early as possible. The
original Unix packet filter was designed around a stack-based
filter evaluator that performs sub-optimally on current RISC
CPUs. The BSD Packet Filter (BPF) uses a new, register-
based filter evaluator that is up to 20 times faster than the
original design. BPF also uses a straightforward buffering
strategy that makes its overall performance up to 100 times
faster than Sun's NIT running on the same hardware.
1 Introduction
Unix has become synonymous with high quality networking
and today's Unix users depend on having reliable, responsive
network access. Unfortunately, this dependence means that
network trouble can make it impossible to get useful work
done and increasingly users and system administrators find
that a large part of their time is spent isolating and fixing
network problems. Problem solving requires appropriate di-
agnostic and analysis tools and, ideally, these tools should
be available where the problems are---on Unix workstations.
To allow such tools to be constructed, a kernel must contain
some facility that gives user-level programs access to raw,
unprocessed network traffic.[7] Most of today's workstation
operating systems contain such a facility, e.g., NIT[10] in
3 This is a preprint of a paper to be presented at the 1993 Winter
USENIX conference, January 25--29, 1993, San Diego, CA.
y This work was supported by the Director, Office of Energy Research,
Scientific Computing Staff, of the U.S. Department of Energy under Contract
No. DE-AC03-76SF00098.
SunOS, the Ultrix Packet Filter[2] in DEC's Ultrix and Snoop
in SGI's IRIX.
These kernel facilities derive from pioneering work done at
CMU and Stanford to adapt the Xerox Alto `packet filter' to a
Unix kernel[8]. When completed in 1980, the CMU/Stanford
Packet Filter, CSPF, provided a much needed and widely used
facility. However on today's machines its performance, and
the performance of its descendents, leave much to be de-
sired --- a design that was entirely appropriate for a 64KB
PDP-11 is simply not a good match to a 16MB Sparcstation
2. This paper describes the BSD Packet Filter, BPF, a new
kernel architecture for packet capture. BPF offers substan-
tial performance improvement over existing packet capture
facilities---10 to 150 times faster than Sun's NIT and 1.5 to 20
times faster than CSPF on the same hardware and traffic mix.
The performance increase is the result of two architectural
improvements:
ffl BPF uses a re-designed, register-based `filter machine'
that can be implemented efficiently on today's register
based RISC CPU. CSPF used a memory-stack-based
filter machine that worked well on the PDP-11 but is a
poor match to memory-bottlenecked modern CPUs.
ffl BPF uses a simple, non-shared buffer model made pos-
sible by today's larger address spaces. The model is
very efficient for the `usual cases' of packet capture. 1
In this paper, we present the design of BPF, outline how it
interfaces with the rest of the system, and describe the new
approach to the filtering mechanism. Finally, we present
performance measurements of BPF, NIT, and CSPF which
show why BPF performs better than the other approaches.
1 As opposed to, for example, the AT&T STREAMS buffer model used
by NIT which has enough options to be Turing complete but appears to be a
poor match to any practical problem.
1

2 BPF -- The BSD Packet Filter
2 The Network Tap
BPF has two main components: the network tap and the
packet filter. The network tap collects copies of packets from
the network device drivers and delivers them to listening ap-
plications. The filter decides if a packet should be accepted
and, if so, how much of it to copy to the listening application.
Figure 1 illustrates BPF's interface with the rest of the sys-
tem. When a packet arrives at a network interface the link
level device driver normally sends it up the system protocol
stack. But when BPF is listening on this interface, the driver
first calls BPF.BPF feeds the packet to each participating pro-
cess' filter. This user-defined filter decides whether a packet
is to be accepted and how many bytes of each packet should
be saved. For each filter that accepts the packet, BPF copies
the requested amount of data to the buffer associated with that
filter. The device driver then regains control. If the packet
was not addressed to the local host, the driver returns from the
interrupt. Otherwise, normal protocol processing proceeds.
buffer
filter
network
monitor
link-level
driver
link-level
driver
link-level
driver
protocol
stack
buffer
filter
network
monitor
buffer
filter
rarpd
user
kernel
kernel
network
BPF
Figure 1: BPF Overview
Since a process might want to look at every packet on a
network and the time between packets can be only a few
microseconds, it is not possible to do a read system call per
packet and BPF must collect the data from several packets
and return it as a unit when the monitoring application does
a read. To maintain packet boundaries, BPF encapsulates the
captured data from each packet with a header that includes a
time stamp, length, and offsets for data alignment.
2.1 Packet Filtering
Because network monitors often want only a small subset of
network traffic, a dramatic performance gain is realized by
filtering out unwanted packets in interrupt context. To min-
imize memory traffic, the major bottleneck in most modern
workstations, the packet should be filtered `in place' (e.g.,
where the network interface DMA engine put it) rather than
copied to some other kernel buffer before filtering. Thus, if
the packet is not accepted, only those bytes that were needed
by the filtering process are referenced by the host.
In contrast, SunOS'sSTREAMS NIT [10] copies the pack-
ets before filtering and as a result suffers a performance degra-
dation. The STREAMS packet filter module (nit pf(4M)) sits
on top of the packet capture module (nit if(4M)). Each packet
received is copied to an mbuf, and passed off to NIT, which
then allocates a STREAMS message buffer and copies in
the packet. The message buffer is then sent upstream to the
packet filter, which may decide to discard the packet. Thus,
a copy of each packet is always made, and many CPU cycles
will be wasted copying unwanted packets.
2.2 Tap Performance Measurements
Before discussing the details of the packet filter, we present
some measurements which compare the the relative costs of
the BPF and SunOS STREAMS buffering models. This per-
formance is independent of the packet filtering machinery.
We configured both BPF and NIT into the same SunOS
4.1.1 kernel, and took our measurements on a Sparcstation 2.
The measurements reflect the overhead incurred during the
interrupt processing --- i.e., how long it takes each system to
stash the packet into a buffer. For BPF we simply measured
the before and after times of the tap call, bpf tap(), using the
Sparcstation's microsecond clock. For NIT we measured the
time of the tap call snit intr() plus the additional overhead of
copying promiscuous packets to mbufs. (Promiscuous pack-
ets are those packets which were not addressed to the local
host, and are present only because the packet filter is run-
ning.) In other words, we included the performance hit that
NIT takes for not filtering packets in place. To obtain accurate
timings, interrupts were locked out during the instrumented
code segments.
The data sets were taken as a histogram of processing time
versus packet length. We plotted the mean processing per
packet versus packet size, for two configurations: an ``accept
all'' filter, and a ``reject all'' filter.
In the first case, the STREAMS NIT buffering module
(nit buf(4M)) was pushed on the NIT stream with its chunk-
size parameter set to the 16K bytes. Similarly, BPF was
configured to use 16K buffers. The packet filtering module
which usually sits between the NIT interface and NIT buffer-
ing modules was omitted to effect ``accept all'' semantics. In
both cases, no truncation limits were specified. This data is
shown in Figure 2. Both BPF and NIT show a linear growth
with captured packet size reflecting the cost of packet-to-filter
buffer copies. However the different slopes of the BPF and

Winter USENIX -- Jan., 1993 -- San Diego, CA 3
Packet Size (bytes)
Mean
Per
Packet
Overhead
(usec)
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
NIT
BPF
89.2
5.7 NIT Incremental Overhead: 216 ns/byte
BPF Incremental Overhead: 148 ns/byte
Figure 2: NIT versus BPF: ``accept all''
NIT lines show that BPF does its copies at memory speed
(148ns/byte) while NIT runs 45% slower (216ns/byte). 2 The
y-intercept gives the fixed per-packet processing overhead:
The overhead of a BPF call is about 6습 while NIT is 15
times worse at 89습 per packet. Much of this huge disparity
appears to be due to the cost of allocating and initializing a
buffer under the remarkably baroque AT&T STREAM I/O
system. 3
Figure 3 shows the results for the ``reject all'' configuration.
Herethe STREAMS packet filter module was configured with
a ``reject all'' filter and pushed directly on top of the NIT inter-
face module (the NIT buffering module was not used). Since
the filter discards all packets, the processing time should be
constant, independent of the packet size. For BPF this is true
--- we see essentially the same fixed cost as last time (5습
instead of 6 since rejecting avoids a call to the BPF copy
routine) and no effect due to packet size. However, as ex-
plained earlier, NIT doesn't filter packets in place but instead
2 This difference is due to the fact that NIT is not as careful about align-
ment as BPF. The network driver wants the IP header aligned on a longword
boundary, but an Ethernet header is 14 bytes so the start of the packet is short-
word aligned. Since NIT copies the packet to a longword aligned boundary,
an inefficient, misaligned bcopy results. This oversight will be felt twice
--- once in this measurement, and again at the user-level, when for instance,
a network monitor like tcpdump or etherfind must copy the network-layer
portion of the packet to a longword aligned boundary.
3 You might note anomalous behavior near the origin for the NIT data
in both this and the following graph. STREAMS must allocate an mblk (a
STREAMS buffer descriptor) for every packet. For small packets, the packet
data is copied into a region of the mblk while large packets must use a more
elaborate allocator involving additional dblk (`data block') allocations.
copies packets then runs the filter over the copies. 4 Thus the
cost of running NIT increases with packet size even when
the packet is discarded by the filter. For large packets, this
gratuitous copy makes NIT almost two orders of magnitude
more expensive than BPF (450습 vs. 5습).
The major lesson here is that filtering packets early and
in place pays off. While a STREAMS-like design might ap-
pear to be modular and elegant, the performance implications
of module partitioning need to be considered in the design.
We claim that even a STREAMS-based network tap should
include the packet filtering and buffering functionality in its
lowest layer. There is very little design advantage in factor-
ing the packet filter into a separate streams module, but great
performance advantage in integrating the packet filter and the
tap into a single unit.
3 The Filter Model
Assumingone uses reasonable care in the design of the buffer-
ing model, 5 it will be the dominant cost of packets you accept
while the packet filter computation will be the dominant cost
of packets you reject. Most applications of a packet capture
facility reject far more packets than they accept and, thus,
good performance of the packet filter is critical to good over-
all performance.
4 The copy is required because the filter is a separate STREAM module
pushed on top of the capture module and, thus, the capture module must
copy data to STREAM buffers to send it up the stream to the filter module.
As was the case with capture/buffer separation, the documentation notes this
capture/filter separation is a feature, not a bug.
5 E.g., not STREAMS.

4 BPF -- The BSD Packet Filter
Packet Size (bytes)
Mean
Per
Packet
Overhead
(usec)
0 200 400 600 800 1000 1200 1400 1600
0
100
200
300
400
500
NIT
BPF
136
4.6
NIT Incremental Overhead: 210 ns/byte
BPF Incremental Overhead: 0 ns/byte
Figure 3: NIT versus BPF: ``reject all''
A packet filter is simply a boolean valued function on a
packet. If the value of the function is true the kernel copies the
packet for the application; if it is false the packet is ignored.
Historically there have been two approaches to the fil-
ter abstraction: a boolean expression tree (used by CSPF)
and a directed acyclic control flow graph or CFG (first used
by NNStat[1] and used by BPF). For example, Figure 4 il-
lustrates the two models with a filter that recognizes either
IP or ARP packets on an Ethernet. In the tree model each
node represents a boolean operation while the leaves repre-
sent test predicates on packet fields. The edges represent
operator-operand relationships. In the CFG model each node
represents a packet field predicate while the edges represent
control transfers. The righthand branch is traversed if the
predicate is true, the lefthand branch if false. There are two
terminating leaves which represent true and false for the en-
tire filter.
These two models of filtering are computationally equiv-
alent. I.e., any filter that can be expressed in one can be
expressed in the other. However, in implementation they are
very different: The tree model maps naturally into code for a
stack machine while the CFG model maps naturally into code
for a register machine. Since most modern machines are reg-
ister based, we will argue that the CFG approach lends itself
to a more efficient implementation.
3.1 The CSPF (Tree) Model
The CSPF filter engine is based on an operand stack. In-
structions either push constants or packet data on the stack,
or perform a binary boolean or bitwise operation on the top
two elements. A filter program is a sequentially executed list
of instructions. After evaluating a program, if the top of stack
has a non-zero value or the stack is empty then the packet is
accepted, otherwise it is rejected.
There are two implementation shortcomings of the expres-
sion tree approach: 6
ffl The operand stack must be simulated. On most modern
machines this means generating add and subtract opera-
tions to maintain a simulated stack pointer and actually
doing loads and stores to memory to simulate the stack.
Since memory tends to be the major bottleneck in mod-
ern architectures, a filter model that can use values in
machine registers and avoid this memory traffic will be
more efficient.
ffl The tree model often does unnecessary or redundant
computations. For example, the tree in fig. 4 will com-
pute the value of `ether.type == ARP' even if the test
for IP is true. While this problem can be somewhat
mitigated by adding `short circuit' operators to the filter
machine, some inefficiency is intrinsic: Because of the
6 Note that it is not our intention to denigrate CSPF or its enormous
contribution to the community --- we simply wish to investigate the imple-
mentation implications of its filter modelwhen run onmodern hardware. The
CSPF filtering mechanism was intended to support efficient protocol demul-
tiplexing for user-level network code. The initial implementation achieved
huge gains by performing user-specified demultiplexing inside the kernel
rather than in a user-process. After this, the incremental gain from a more
efficient filter design was negligible and, as a result, the designers of CSPF
invested less effort in the filter machinery and, indeed, have pointed out that
the ``filter language is not a result of careful analysis but rather embodies
several accidents of history''[8].

Winter USENIX -- Jan., 1993 -- San Diego, CA 5
ether.type=IP ether.type=ARP
OR
ether.type=IP
ether.type=ARP
Tree Representation
FALSE TRUE
yes
yes
no
no
CFG Representation
Figure 4: Filter Function Representations.
hierarchical design of network protocols, packet headers
must be parsed to reach successive layers of encapsu-
lation. Since each leaf of the expression tree represents
a packet field, independent of other leaves, redundant
parses may be carried out to evaluate the entire tree. In
the CFG representation, it is always possible to reorder
the graph in such a way that at most one parse is done
for any layer. 7
Another problem with CSPF, recognized by the designers,
is its inability to parse variable length packet headers, e.g.,
TCP headers encapsulated in a variable length IP header. Be-
cause the CSPF instruction set didn't include an indirection
operator, only packet data at fixed offsets is accessible. Also,
the CSPF model is restricted to a single sixteen bit data type
which results in a doubling of the number of operations to
manipulate 32 bit data such as Internet addresses or TCP se-
quence numbers. Finally, the design does not permit access
to the last byte of an odd-length packet.
While the CSPF model has shortcomings, it offers a novel
generalization of packet filtering: The idea of putting a
pseudo-machine language interpreter in the kernel provides a
7 This graph reordering is, however, a non-trivial problem. Our BPF
compiler (part of tcpdump[4]) contains a fairly sophisticated optimizer to
reorder and minimize CFG filters. This optimizer is the subject of a future
paper.
nice abstraction for describing and implementing the filtering
mechanism. And, since CSPF treats a packet as a simple array
of bytes, the filtering model is completely protocol indepen-
dent. (The application that specifies the filter is responsible
for encoding the filter appropriately for the underlying net-
work media and protocols.)
The BPF model, described in the next section, is an attempt
to maintain the strengths of CSPF while addressing its limi-
tations and the performance shortcomings of the stack-based
filter machine.
3.2 The BPF Model
3.2.1 CFGs vs. Trees
BPF uses the CFG filter model since it has a significant per-
formance advantage over the expression tree model. While
the tree model may need to redundantly parse a packet many
times, the CFG model allows parse information to be `built
into' the flow graph. I.e., packet parse state is `remembered'
in the graph since you know what paths you must have tra-
versed to reach to a particular node and once a subexpression
is evaluated it need not be recomputed since the control flow
graph can always be (re-)organized so the value is only used
at nodes that follow the original computation.
TRUE
FALSE
ether.type=ARP
ip.dst=foo
arp.dst=foo
ether.type=RARP
ether.type=IP
ip.src=foo
arp.src=foo
Figure 5: CFG Filter Function for ``host foo''.
For example, Figure 5 shows a CFG filter function that ac-
cepts all packets with an Internet address foo. We consider a
scenario where the network layer protocols are IP, ARP, and
Reverse ARP, all of which contain source and destination
Internet addresses. The filter should catch all cases. Accord-
ingly, the link layer type field is tested first. In the case of
IP packets, the IP host address fields are queried, while in
the case of ARP packets, the ARP address fields are used.
Note that once we learn that the packet is IP, we do not need

6 BPF -- The BSD Packet Filter
OR
AND AND
OR
OR OR
ip.src=foo ip.dst=foo
ether.type=IP
ether.type=ARP ether.type=RARP arp.src=foo arp.dst=foo
Figure 6: Tree Filter Function for ``host foo''.
to check that it might be ARP or RARP. In the expression
tree model, shown in figure 6, seven comparison predicates
and six boolean operations are required to traverse the entire
tree. The longest path through the CFG has five comparison
operations, and the average number of comparisons is three.
3.2.2 Design of filter pseudo-machine
The use of a control flow graph rather than an expression tree
as the theoretical underpinnings of the filter pseudo-machine
is a necessary step towards an efficient implementation but it
is not sufficient. Even after leveraging off the experience and
pseudo-machine models of CSPF and NNStat[1], the BPF
model underwent several generations (and several years) of
design and test. We believe the current model offers sufficient
generality with no sacrifice in performance. Its evolution was
guided by the following design constraints:
1. It must be protocol independent. The kernel should not
have to be modified to add new protocol support.
2. It must be general. The instruction set should be rich
enough to handle unforeseen uses.
3. Packet data references should be minimized.
4. Decoding an instruction should consist of a single C
switch statement.
5. The abstract machine registers should reside in physical
registers.
Like CSPF, constraint 1 is adhered to simply by not men-
tioning any protocols in the model. Packets are viewed
simply as byte arrays.
Constraint 2 means that we must provide a fairly general
computational model, with control flow, sufficient ALU op-
erations, and conventional addressing modes.
Constraint3 requires that we only ever touch a given packet
word once. It is common for a filter to compare a given packet
field against a set of values, then compare another field against
another set of values, and so on. For example, a filter might
match packets addressed to a set of machines, or a set of TCP
ports. Ideally, we would like to cache the packet field in a
register and compare it across the set of values. If the field is
encapsulated in a variable length header, we must parse the
outer headers to reach the data. Furthermore, on alignment
restricted machines, accessing multi-byte data can involve an
expensive byte-by-byte load. Also, for packets in mbufs, a
field access may involve traversing an mbuf chain. After we
have done this work once, we should not do it again.
Constraint 4 means that we will have an efficient instruc-
tion decoding step but it precludes an orthogonal addressing
mode design unless we are willing to accommodate a combi-
natorial explosion of switch cases. For example, while three
address instructions make sense for a real processor (where
much work is done in parallel) the sequential execution model
of an interpreter means that each address descriptor would
have to be decoded serially. A single address instruction
format minimizes the decode, while maintaining sufficient
generality.
Finally, Constraint 5 is a straightforward performance con-
sideration. Along with constraint 4, it enforces the notion that
the pseudo-machine register set should be small.
These constraints prompted the adoption of an accumu-
lator machine model. Under this model, each node in the
flowgraph computes its corresponding predicate by comput-
ing a value into the accumulator and branching based on that
value. Figure 7 shows the filter function of Figure 5 using
the BPF instruction set.
3.3 The BPF Pseudo-Machine
The BPF machine abstraction consists of an accumulator, an
index register (x), a scratch memory store, and an implicit
program counter. The operations on these elements can be
categorized into the following groups:
1. Load Instructions copy a value into the accumulator
or index register. The source can be an immediate value,
packet data at a fixed offset, packet data at a variable
offset, the packet length, or the scratch memory store.

Winter USENIX -- Jan., 1993 -- San Diego, CA 7
TRUE
FALSE
ldh [12]
jeq #0x800
ld [38]
jeq #foo
ld [28]
jeq #foo
ld [26]
jeq #foo
ld [30]
jeq #foo
jeq #0x805
jeq #0x8035
Figure 7: BPF Program for ``host foo''.
2. Store Instructions copy either the accumulator or
index register into the scratch memory store.
3. ALU Instructions perform arithmetic or logic on the
accumulator using the index register or a constant as an
operand.
4. Branch Instructions alter the flow of control, based
on comparison test between a constant or x register and
the accumulator.
5. ReturnInstructions terminate the filter and indicated
what portion of the packet to save. The packet is dis-
carded entirely if the filter returns 0.
6. Miscellaneous Instructions comprise everything
else --- currently, register transfer instructions.
The fixed-length instruction format is defined by as fol-
lows:
opcode:16 jt:8 jf:8
k:32
Theopcode field indicates the instruction type and address-
ing modes. The jt and jf fields are used by the conditional
jump instructions and are the offsets from the next instruction
to the true and false targets. The k field is a generic field used
for various purposes.
Table 1 shows the entire BPF instruction set. We have
adopted this ``assembler syntax'' as a means of illustrating
BPF filters and for debugging output. The actual encodings
are defined with C macros, the details of which we omit here
(see [6] for full details). Thecolumn labelled addr modes lists
the addressing modes allowed for each instruction listed in
the opcode column. The semantics of the addressing modes
are listed in Table 2.
opcodes addr modes
ldb [k] [x+k]
ldh [k] [x+k]
ld #k #len M[k] [k] [x+k]
ldx #k #len M[k] 4*([k]&0xf)
st M[k]
stx M[k]
jmp L
jeq #k, Lt, Lf
jgt #k, Lt, Lf
jge #k, Lt, Lf
jset #k, Lt, Lf
add #k x
sub #k x
mul #k x
div #k x
and #k x
or #k x
lsh #k x
rsh #k x
ret #k a
tax
txa
Table 1: BPF Instruction Set
The load instructions simply copy the indicated value into
the accumulator (ld, ldh, ldb) or index register (ldx).
The index register cannot use the packet addressing modes.
Instead, a packet value must be loaded into the accumulator
and transferred to the index register, via tax. This is not a
common occurrence, as the index register is used primarily
to parse the variable length IP header, which can be loaded
directly via the 4*([k]&0xf) addressing mode. All values
are 32 bit words, except packet data can be loaded into the
accumulator as unsigned bytes (ldb) or unsigned halfwords
(ldh). Similarly, the scratch memory store is addressed as
an array of 32 bit words. The instruction fields are all in host
byte order, and the load instructions convert packet data from
network order to host order. Any reference to data beyond
the end of the packet terminates the filter with a return value
of zero (i.e., the packet is discarded).
The ALU operations (add, sub, etc.) perform the indi-
cated operation using the accumulator and operand, and store
the result back into the accumulator. Division by zero termi-
nates the filter.
The jump instructions compare the value in the accumula-
tor with a constant (jset performs a ``bitwise and'' --- useful
for conditional bit tests). If the result is true (or non-zero),
the true branch is taken, otherwise the false branch is taken.
Arbitrary comparisons, which are less common, can be done
by subtracting and comparing to 0. Note that there are no
jlt, jle or jne opcodes since these can be built from the

8 BPF -- The BSD Packet Filter
#k the literal value stored in k
#len the length of the packet
M[k] the word at offset k in the scratch mem-
ory store
[k] the byte, halfword, or word at byte offset
k in the packet
[x+k] the byte, halfword, or word at offset x+k
in the packet
L an offset from the current instruction to
L
#k, Lt, Lf the offset to Lt if the predicate is true,
otherwise the offset to Lf
x the index register
4*([k]&0xf) four times the value of the low four bits
of the byte at offset k in the packet
Table 2: BPF Addressing Modes
codes above by reversing the branches. Since jump offsets
are encoded in eight bits, the longest jump is 256 instructions.
Jumps longer than this are conceivable, so a jump always op-
code is provided (jmp) that uses the 32 bit operand field for
the offset.
The return instructions terminate the program and indicate
how many bytes of the packet to accept. If that amount is
0, the packet will be rejected entirely. The actual amount
accepted will be the minimum of the length of the packet and
the amount indicated by the filter.
3.4 Examples
Wenow present some examples to illustrate how packet filters
can be expressed using the BPF instruction set. (In all the
examples that follow, we assume Ethernet format for the link
level headers.)
This filter accepts all IP packets:
ldh [12]
jeq #ETHERTYPE IP, L1, L2
L1: ret #TRUE
L2: ret #0
The first instruction loads the Ethernet type field. We com-
pare this to type IP. If the comparison fails, zero is returned
and the packet is rejected. If it is successful, TRUE is re-
turned and the packet is accepted. (TRUE is some non-zero
value that represents the number of bytes to save.)
This next filter accepts all IP packets which did not origi-
nate from two particular IP networks, 128.3.112 or 128.3.254.
If the Ethernet type is IP, the IP source address is loaded and
the high 24 bits are masked off. This value is compared with
the two network addresses:
ldh [12]
jeq #ETHERTYPE IP, L1, L4
L1: ld [26]
and #0xffffff00
jeq #0x80037000, L4, L2
L2: jeq #0x8003fe00, L4, L3
L3: ret #TRUE
L4: ret #0
3.5 Parsing Packet Headers
The previous examples assume that the data of interest lie at
fixed offsets in the packet. This is not the case, for example,
with TCP packets, which are encapsulated in a variable length
IP header. The start of TCP header must be computed from
the length given in the IP header.
The IP header length is given by the low four bits of the
first byte in the IP section (byte 14 on an Ethernet). This
value is a word offset, and must be scaled by four to get the
corresponding byte offset. The instructions below will load
this offset into the accumulator:
ldb [14]
and #0xf
lsh #2
Once the IP header length is computed, data in the TCP
section can be accessed using indirect loads. Note that the
effective offset has three components:
ffl the IP header length,
ffl the link level header length, and
ffl the data offset relative to the TCP header.
For example, an Ethernet header is 14 bytes and the desti-
nation port in a TCP packet is at byte two. Thus, adding 16
to the IP header length gives the offset to the TCP destination
port. The previous code segment is shown below, augmented
to test the TCP destination port against some value N:
ldb [14]
and #0xf
lsh #2
tax
ldh [x+16]
jeq #N, L1, L2
L1: ret #TRUE
L2: ret #0
Because the IP header length calculation is a common oper-
ation, the 4*([k]&0xf) addressing mode was introduced.
Substituting in the ldx instruction simplifies the filter into:
ldx 4*([14]&0xf)
ldh [x+16]
jeq #N, L1, L2
L1: ret #TRUE
L2: ret #0

Winter USENIX -- Jan., 1993 -- San Diego, CA 9
However, the above filter is valid only if the data we are
looking at is really a TCP/IP header. Hence, the filter must
also check that link layer type is IP, and that the IP protocol
type is TCP. Also, the IP layer might fragment a TCP packet,
in which case the TCP header is present only in the first frag-
ment. Hence, any packets with a non-zero fragment offset
should be rejected. The final filter is shown below:
ldh [12]
jeq #ETHERPROTO IP, L1, L5
L1: ldb [23]
jeq #IPPROTO TCP, L2, L5
L2: ldh [20]
jset #0x1fff, L5, L3
L3: ldx 4*([14]&0xf)
ldh [x+16]
jeq #N, L4, L5
L4: ret #TRUE
L5: ret #0
3.6 Filter Performance Measurements
We profiled the BPF and CSPF filtering models outside the
kernel using iprof [9], an instruction count profiler. To fully
compare the two models, an indirection operator was added
to CSPF so it could parse IP headers. The change was minor
anddid not adversely affect the original filtering performance.
Tests were run on large packet trace files gathered from a busy
UC Berkeley campus network. Figure 8 shows the results for
four fairly typical filters.
Filter 1 is trivial. It tests whether one 16 bit word in the
packet is a given value. The two models are fairly compara-
ble, with BPF faster by about 50%.
Filter 2 looks for a particular IP host (source or destina-
tion) and shows more of a disparity---a performance gap of
240%. The larger difference here is due mostly to the fact that
CSPF operates only on 16 bit words and needs two compar-
ison operations to determine the equality of a 32 bit Internet
address.
Filter 3 is an example of packet parsing (required to locate
the TCP destination port field) and illustrates a yet greater
performance gap. The BPF filter parses the packet once,
loading the port field into the accumulator then simply does a
comparison cascade of the interesting ports. The CSPF filter
must re-do the parse and relocate the TCP header for each
port to be tested.
Finally, filter 5 demonstrates the effect of the unnecessary
computations done by CSPF for a filter similar to the one
described in figures 6 and 5.
4 Applications
BPF is now about two years old and has been put to work in
several applications. The most widely used is tcpdump [4],
a network monitoring and data acquisition tool. Tcpdump
performs three primary tasks: filter translation, packet ac-
quisition, and packet display. Of interest here is the filter
translation mechanism. A filter is specified with a user-
friendly, high level description language. Tcpdump has a
built in compiler (and optimizer) which translates the high
level filters into BPF programs. Of course, this translation
process is transparent to the user.
Arpwatch [5] is a passive monitoring program that tracks
Ethernet to IP address mappings. It notifies the system ad-
ministrator, via email, when new mappings are established
or abnormal behavior is noted. A common administrative
nuisance is the use of a single IP address by more than one
physical host, which arpwatch dutifully detects and reports.
A very different application of BPF has been its incor-
poration into a variant of the Icon Programming Language
[3]. Two new data types, a packet and a packet generator
have been built into the Icon interpreter. Packets appear as
first class record objects, allowing convenient ``dot operator''
access to packet headers. A packet generator can be instanti-
ated directly off the network, or from a previously collected
file of trace data. Icon is an interpreted, dynamically typed
language with high level string scanning primitives and rich
data structures. With the BPF extensions, it is well suited for
the rapid prototyping of networking analysis tools.
Netload and histo are two network visualization tools
which produce real time network statistics on an X dis-
play. Netload graphs utilization data in real time, using
tcpdump style filter specifications. Histo produces a dynamic
interarrival-time histogram of timestamped multimedia net-
work packets.
The Reverse ARP daemon uses the BPF interface to read
and write Reverse ARP requests and replies directly to the
local network. (We developed this program to allow us to
entirely replace NIT by BPF in our SunOS 4 systems. Each of
the Sun NIT-based applications (etherfind, traffic, and rarpd)
now has a BPF analog.)
Finally, recent versions of NNStat[1] and nfswatch can be
configured to run over BPF (in addition to running over NIT).
5 Conclusion
BPF has proven to be an efficient, extensible, and portable
interface for network monitoring. Our comparison studies
have shown that it outperforms NIT in its buffer manage-
ment and CSPF in its filtering mechanism. Its programmable
pseudo-machine model has demonstrated excellent general-
ity and extensibility (all knowledge of particular protocols is
factored out of the kernel). Finally, the system is portable
and runs on most BSD and BSD-derivative systems 8 and can
interact with various data link layers 9 .
8 SunOS 3.5, HP-300 and HP-700 BSD,SunOS 4.x, 4.3BSD Tahoe/Reno,
and 4.4BSD.
9 Ethernet, FDDI, SLIP, and PPP are currently supported.

10 BPF -- The BSD Packet Filter
0
500
1000
1500
2000
2500
Mean Number of CPU Instructions Per Packet
BPF
CSPF
62 96 160
549
222
971
129
2330
Filter 1 Filter 2 Filter 3 Filter 4
Filter 1 IP packets
Filter 2 IP packets with src or dst ``horse''
Filter 3 TCP packets with src or dst port of finger, domain, login, or shell
Filter 4 IP, ARP or RARP packets between hosts ``horse'' and ``gauguin''
Figure 8: BPF/CSPF Filter Performance

Winter USENIX -- Jan., 1993 -- San Diego, CA 11
6 Availability
BPF is available via anonymous ftp from
host ftp.ee.lbl.gov as part of the tcpdump distribution,
currently in the file tcpdump-2.2.1.tar.Z. Eventually
we plan to factor BPF out into its own distribution so look
for bpf-*.tar.Z in the future. Arpwatch and netload are
also available from this site.
7 Acknowledgements
This paper would never have been published without the en-
couragement of Jeffrey Mogul. Jeff ported tcpdump to Ultrix
and added little-endian support, uncovering dozens of our
byte-ordering bugs. He also inspired the jset instruction
by forcing us to consider the arduous task of parsing DEC-
NET packet headers. Mike Karels suggested that the filter
should decide not only whether to accept a packet, but also
howmuch of it to keep. Craig Leres was the first major user of
BPF/tcpdump and is responsible for finding and fixing many
bugs in both. Chris Torek helped with the packet processing
performance measurements and provided insight on various
BSD peculiarities. Finally, we are grateful to the many users
and extenders of BPF/tcpdump across the Internet for their
suggestions, bug fixes, source code, and the many questions
that have, over the years, greatly broadened our view of the
networking world and BPF's place in it.
Finally, we would like to thank Vern Paxson, Craig Leres,
Jeff Mogul, Sugih Jamin, and the referees for their helpful
comments on drafts of this paper.
References
[1] Braden, R. T. A pseudo-machine for packet monitoring and
statistics. In Proceedings of SIGCOMM '88 (Stanford, CA,
Aug. 1988), ACM.
[2] Digital Equipment Corporation. packetfilter(4), Ultrix
V4.1 Manual.
[3] Griswold, R. E., and Griswold, M. T. The Icon Program-
ming Language. Prentice Hall, Inc., Englewood Cliffs, NJ,
1983.
[4] Jacobson, V., Leres, C., and McCanne, S. The Tcpdump
Manual Page. Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory, Berkeley, CA,
June 1989.
[5] Leres, C. The Arpwatch Manual Page. Lawrence Berkeley
Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, Sept. 1992.
[6] McCanne, S. The BPF Manual Page. Lawrence Berkeley
Laboratory, Berkeley, CA, May 1991.
[7] Mogul, J. C. Efficient use of workstations for passive mon-
itoring of local area networks. In Proceedings of SIGCOMM
'90 (Philadelphia, PA, Sept. 1990), ACM.
[8] Mogul, J. C., Rashid, R. F., and Accetta, M. J. The packet
filter: An efficient mechanism for user-level network code. In
Proceedings of 11th Symposium on Operating Systems Prin-
ciples (Austin, TX, Nov. 1987), ACM, pp. 39--51.
[9] Rice, S. P. iprof source code, May 1991. Brown University.
[10] Sun Microsystems Inc. NIT(4P); SunOS 4.1.1 Reference
Manual. Mountain View, CA, Oct. 1990. Part Number: 800-
5480-10.

